---
layout: page
title: 2014 CS109 Data Science Syllabus
---

**Instructors:** Hanspeter Pfister (Computer Science), Joe Blitzstein (Statistics) 

**Key is this class about?**

This was the first iteration of this class. A lot of excitement about this course 

* and interpretable summaries.


ADD VIDEOS LINKS 

ADD A VISUAL 

**What is the structure of the class?**

There will be three major modules, each focusing on an important arena in which data science is playing a crucial role. Within each module, we will study how to gather, explore, and analyze relevant data, as well as how to communicate the results. The major programming language used will be Python. 

There will be five problem sets, in which students will learn about learning from data *actively*---by doing it! There will also be a major final project, in which students can explore data they are excited about in a more open-ended setting.


The three modules are:

*1. Prediction and elections:* how did Nate Silver predict 50 out of 50 states correctly in the 2012 U.S. presidential election, and 49 out of 50 correctly in the 2008 election? How much of that was luck? We will discuss how to find, process, combine, visualize, simulate, and summarize election-related data and questions, especially if there are conflicting polls with different reliabilities.

*2. Recommendation and business analytics*: the Neflix Prize was a famous recent example of collaborative filtering: given information about which movies various users have liked and disliked, how should Netflix make recommendations for what movies a user should watch? Many other companies are interested in closely-related problems. Often there is a very large but very sparse data set (e.g., there could be millions of users and tens of thousands of movies, but very few users rate more than a few hundred movies). We will explore techniques for working with such data.

*3. Clustering and text analysis:* Finding structure in  unlabeled data is an important aspect of data science. We will talk about methods for various types of data, including text document analysis via topic modeling. Topic modeling answers questions like: Which topics does a specific document talk about? Which tags would be appropriate for this image according to its description? What is the most important topic of our customers twitter feeds? 





**Project Group Peer Assessment**

In the professional world, three important features affect your productivity and success: your own effort, the effort of people you depend on, and the way you work together. For this reason we have chosen a team-based approach that values all three of those features. After the team-based project you will provide an assessment of the contributions of the members of your team, including yourself. Your teammates' assessment of your contributions and the accuracy of your self-assessment will be considered as part of your overall course evaluation.

**Collaboration Policy**

You are welcome to discuss the course\'s ideas, material, and homework with others in order to better understand it, but **the work you turn in must be your own** (or for the project, yours and your teammate\'s). For example, you must write your own code, run your own data analyses, and communicate and explain the results in your own words and with your own visualizations. You may not submit the same or similar work to this course that you have submitted or will submit to another. Nor may you provide or make available solutions to homeworks to individuals who take or may take this course in the future. You are responsible for understanding the [Harvard College](https://college.harvard.edu/academics/academic-integrity) and [Extension School](www.extension.harvard.edu/resources-policies/student-conduct/academic-integrity) policies on academic integrity and how to use sources responsibly. Not knowing the rules, misunderstanding the rules, running out of time, submitting "the wrong draft", or being overwhelmed with multiple demands are not acceptable excuses. There are no excuses for failure to uphold academic integrity. 

**Quoting Sources**

You must acknowledge any source code that was not written by you by mentioning the original author(s) directly in your source code (comment or header). You can also acknowledge sources in a README.txt file if you used whole classes or libraries. Do not remove any original copyright notices and headers. However, you are encouraged to use libraries, unless explicitly stated otherwise! You may use examples you find on the web as a starting point, provided its license allows you to re-use it. You must quote the source using  proper citations (author, year, title, time accessed, URL) both in the source code and in any publicly visible material. You may not use existing complex combinations or large examples. For example, you may not use a ready to use multiple linked view visualization. You may use parts out of such examples. To support your learning about academic citation rules, please visit the Harvard Extension School [Tips to Avoid Plagiarism](www.extension.harvard.edu/resources-policies/resources/tips-avoid-plagiarism), where you'll find links to the Harvard Guide to Using Sources and two, free, online 15-minute tutorials to test your knowledge of academic citation policy. The tutorials are anonymous open-learning tools. 

**Questionnaires**

During the course of the semester, you will complete a number of questionnaires online. The purpose of these questionnaires is to evaluate how well this course works for you. Your answers will only be used to provide feedback on your learning and make adjustments to the course. They will not affect your grade in any way. Unless stated otherwise, you may neither look up any information, nor consult others during these questionnaires.

**Missed Activities and Assignment Deadlines**

Projects and homework **must** be turned in on time, with the exception of late days for homeworks as stated below. It is important that everybody attends and proactively participates in class and online. We understand, however, that certain factors may occasionally interfere with your ability to participate or to hand in work on time. If that factor is an extenuating circumstance, we will ask you to provide documentation directly issued by the University, and we will try to work out an agreeable solution with you (and your teammates). 

**Homework Deadlines and Late Days**

In the weeks when homeworks are due, they will be **due on Thursdays at 11:59 pm EST** unless otherwise announced. Each student is given **six late days** for homework at the beginning of the semester. A late day extends the individual homework deadline by 24 hours without penalty. **No more than two late days may be used on any one assignment. Assignments handed in more than 48 hours after the original deadline will not be graded.** If you have already used all of your late days for the semester, we will deduct 2 point for assignments <24 hours late, and 4 points for assignments 24-48 hours late. We do not accept any homeworks under any circumstances more than 48 hours after the original deadline. Late days are intended to give you flexibility: you can use them for any reason - no questions asked. You don\'t get any bonus points for not using your late days. You can only use late days for the individual homework deadlines. All other deadlines (e.g., project milestones) are hard. 

**Regrading Policy**

It is very important to us that all assignments are properly graded. If you believe there is an error in your assignment grading, please submit an explanation via email to us (the staff mailing list) **within 7 days of receiving the grade**. No regrade requests will be accepted orally, and no regrade requests will be accepted more than 7 days after the grades for the assignment have been sent out. The teaching staff will re-examine your entire assignment. So your score may go up, stay the same, or go down.    

**Guest Lecture Attendance**

We are lucky to have some of the world\'s best researchers take time out of their busy schedules to give guest lectures. We expect all non-distance students to attend these lectures in person and to engage the speakers with questions and comments. You must send an email to the staff at least one day before a guest lecture to be excused.

## Additional Information



**User Notice for Copyrighted Materials on Course Websites**

This course website, and much of the text, images, graphics, audio and video clips, and other content of the site (collectively, the "Content"), are protected by copyright law. In some cases, the copyright is owned by third parties, and Harvard is making the third-party Content available to you under the fair use doctrine. Fair use permits only certain limited uses of the Content. You may use the website and its Content only for your personal, noncommercial educational and scholarly use. Some Content may be provided via streaming or other means that restrict copying; you may not circumvent those restrictions. If you wish to distribute or make any of the Content available to others, or to use any Content commercially, or to use any Content for any purpose other than your personal, noncommercial educational and scholarly use, you must obtain any required permission from the copyright holder. User notice courtesy of the Harvard University Office of General Counsel.



